---
author: Alejandro Figueroa
---

After spending more than a month at the Ashley Marina we are finally off. I'm writing this from our first anchorage about 14 miles up the ICW from the marina.

## Day Before

Yesterday we spent some time doing some final provisioning runs at the pharmacy and grocery store. We also had to do a last minute run to T-Mobile to fix an issue with our hotspot. This will be the primary method we use to work from the boat so ensuring everything was working properly was a high priority. With that out of the way we had to get the boat ready to set sail.

We checked the oil and coolant levels and cleaned the raw water strainer for the engine cooling system. We had also planned to change the impeller but after inspecting it we decided it was in pretty good condition so we left it in place. We also did a quick engine test to verify there were no raw water leaks in the engine compartment.

An aside: one of the reasons we are heading north is to haul the boat out at Norfolk to redo our bottom paint and replace all thruhulls and seacocks. I was reminded just how necessary this was when checking the engine impeller a few days ago. While the handle to the engine raw water intake seacock turns the valve doesn't close. This means cleaning the strainer or changing the impeller will allow the ocean to rush into our boat. This is unacceptable. I improvised by disconnecting the raw water hose before the strainer and attaching a long hose that could be raised above the water line. This worked but is hardly sustainable and mildly nerve wracking.

We stowed as much gear as possible to save time the next day. Anything that isn't safely stowed or nailed down has the possibility of falling and breaking something (or itself). This boat has become our home over the last month; we had things everywhere.

Finally we filed our float plan with family and discussed our undocking procedure for the following day. We were in an awkward, parallel slip facing the wrong way. On one side of us we had the dock office and on the other side of us we had a very large (read: expensive) trawler. Patience is not the most nimble vessel at 11.5 tons and we would have to turn her 180 degrees in a tight space. After checking the morning weather and tides and discussing our options we settled on springing off the dock with our bowline attached. The wind would push our stern off the dock while the bow line would hold our bow to the dock. Once we were 90 degrees off the dock we would reverse until we could kick into forward and set off. Basically a 3 point turn on hard mode.

With all our preparations complete and a month's worth of work behind us we went to sleep confident in our preparedness...

## Setting Sail

Today we woke ready to start our adventure. After showers, coffee, and breakfast we spent the rest of the early morning burning down our departure checklist. In addition to the checklist we also topped off our fresh water tanks, pumped out our holding tanks, and checked our fuel level. We reviewed the weather, tides, and float plan. We spoke with the dock hands to let them know we would need some assistance getting off the dock and once everything and everyone was ready we started our engine.

Getting off the dock was eventful. While the wind worked in our favor we departed before the low slack tide hoping to save some time. Unfortunately this meant conditions weren't perfect and there was a unfavorable current. We sprung off the dock successfully so that we were perpendicular with the dock and put the boat in reverse to pull us away from the dock. Unfortunately the current ended up pulling our port side very close to some docked boats near the dock house. It was turning into a very slow motion boat crash. Thankfully the dock hands were quick to respond and there were several people at the marina that came over to our rescue. With everyone's help we were able to stop our boat and reverse into an open slip with a more favorable exit path. Crisis averted and we were off.

The journey from Ashley Marina into Charleston Harbor to the northbound ICW was uneventful. There is a low bridge just outside of the marina that we only have enough clearance to get under at low tide. We were on a ebbing tide so we made it through with enough room. I had taken us out of the marina but we traded helmsman duties before we reached the ICW. Eugenio the cat decided to come above deck with us to check it all out.

The first obstacle once we were on the ICW was the Ben Sawyer drawbridge. On the weekends they open every hour as requested. We arrived just before 11am and called in our request on the radio. We had to hang out in busy motorboat traffic while the bridge opened for us. This required a 360 degree standing turn at one point to buy us time. We made it through without any drama. It was a pretty cool experience to have a man-made structure move and get out of our way.

The next challenge was navigating the very shallow and narrow channel through Isle of Palms. We had been warned by friends beforehand that this area is prone to shifting sandbars and shoals. Patience has a 5ft draft so we have to be careful where we take her. This was complicated by the fact that we were coming into the area at low tide; very much against the advice we had received. We slowed down and picked our way carefully through the area keeping a keen eye on our depth gauge.

We ran aground.

It was only very briefly. Once the initial panic subsided we assessed the situation and quickly came up with a plan. We put Patience in reverse while turning hard to starboard. Once we saw the depth gauge tick up half a foot we put Patience in forward. With this careful maneuvering at the helm we were free fairly quickly. It felt like an eternity but it was probably only 5 or 10 minutes.

With this excitement behind us the rest of our passage through Isle of Palms was uneventful. We had only planned to go a short distance today to ensure we felt comfortable with all the boat's systems and had an easy abort path should the need arise. Our goal was to reach our planned anchorage at Dewees Creek before 3pm and we were ahead of schedule.

Once we reached Dewees Creek we pulled off the ICW and started cruising around looking for a good anchorage. There would be strong winds this afternoon so we wanted to find an anchorage that would allow us to swing a bit with a 7:1 scope. The average depth in these waters was 10-15ft so we wanted to put out ~90ft of chain to feel comfortable. Once we felt we had identified a good anchorage we had to anchor. This was our first time anchoring by ourselves so it was a little nerve wracking.

We ended up anchoring twice. The first time we set our anchor around 1pm. After checking to be sure we weren't dragging we ate lunch and debriefed on the journey so far. After an hour or so we checked our anchor and the weather and weren't confident we weren't dragging or wouldn't drag once the wind picked up. We decided to raise anchor and try again. This time we reversed hard on the anchor after we felt it had set. We kept an eye on different points and checked them every hour to be sure we weren't dragging. We had a lot more confidence in our second anchoring attempt.

We hung out for the rest of the afternoon in 22 knot gusts before everything calmed down around sunset and we had some delicious homemade flatbread pizzas. The sunset was spectacular.

## At Anchor

We've decided to set a watch every couple hours. We'll alternate turns getting up and checking our anchor to ensure we aren't dragging. While we've set an anchor alarm until we build up more confidence in our tools and anchoring abilities we feel this is a good stopgap.

We won't leave this anchorage until low slack tide which is a little after lunch. We'll spend the morning doing a more in depth debrief of today's excitement with hindsight. This area is beautiful and I'd like to explore some of it in the morning if we can be motivated to lower the dinghy. Other than that we'll likely just relax until it's time to raise anchor.

Our float plan for tomorrow is to continue up the ICW and anchor at the North Santee River. This is roughly double the distance we covered today. We've also identified two earlier anchorages should we decide our plan was too ambitious. The feeling aboard after our first day is cautiously optimistic. Ask me again tomorrow.
